.TH TASKGRIND 1 "2026-04-09" "taskgrind" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
taskgrind \- autonomous multi-session grind tool
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B taskgrind
[\fIhours\fR] [\fIrepo\fR] [\fB\-\-model\fR \fIname\fR] [\fB\-\-skill\fR \fIname\fR] [\fB\-\-backend\fR \fIname\fR] [\fB\-\-prompt\fR \fItext\fR] [\fB\-\-target\-repo\fR \fIpath\fR]... [\fB\-\-from\-prompt\fR \fItext\fR] [\fB\-\-dry\-run\fR] [\fB\-\-preflight\fR] [\fB\-\-resume\fR] [\fB\-\-no\-push\fR] [\fB\-\-supervise\fR \fIstatus-file\fR] [\fB\-\-help\fR] [\fB\-\-version\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
Runs sequential AI coding sessions against a TASKS.md repo until a deadline.
Each session starts with full context, picks a task from TASKS.md, implements
it, commits, removes it from TASKS.md, and exits. Between sessions: cooldown,
optional git sync. Exits when the queue empties, the deadline is reached, or
stall is detected.
.PP
Sessions should exit before context fills; context exhaustion can crash the
process and lose uncommitted work.
.PP
If a session crashes from context exhaustion, the next run can resume from git
and TASKS.md, but any uncommitted work from the crashed session is lost.
.PP
When
.BR \-\-skill " " fleet\-grind
is active, taskgrind injects a
.B CONTEXT_BUDGET
prompt guard. The GPT\-5.5/default standard profile asks the session to keep to
one merge/fill/fix cycle plus at most one narrow sweep and to checkpoint before
expanding scope. The Opus 4.7 alias gets a large\-context profile, while still
preferring clean session boundaries over filling context.
.PP
Arguments can appear in any order. Hours is any bare integer (1\-24, default: 10).
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-\-skill " " \fIname\fR
Skill to run each session (default: next\-task). Accepts any skill installed for
the selected backend, including repo\-local lanes such as
standing\-audit\-gap\-loop.
.TP
.BR \-\-backend " " \fIname\fR
AI backend: devin, claude\-code, codex (default: devin).
.TP
.BR \-\-rotate\-backends " " \fIlist\fR
Override the auto\-detected comma\-separated list of backends to cycle
through when the active backend's session output contains rate\-limit,
quota, or throttle patterns. After each session, taskgrind scans the
just\-finished output for those patterns; on match, the next session
launches with the next backend in the list (cycling). Independent of
.BR \-\-backend ,
which sets the starting backend; the rotation list controls only the
swap target. Same effect as setting
.BR TG_ROTATE_BACKENDS .
.TP
.BR \-\-model " " \fIname\fR
AI model to use (default: "gpt\-5\-5\-xhigh\-priority"; "gpt\-5.5" for codex). Overrides TG_MODEL env var. Short aliases such as
\fBopus\fR, \fBsonnet\fR, \fBhaiku\fR, \fBgpt\fR, \fBcodex\fR, and \fBswe\fR resolve to the
current preferred model IDs. Quote multi-word model names, for example
\fB\-\-model "gpt\-5.5 XHigh thinking fast"\fR.
.TP
.BR \-\-prompt " " \fItext\fR
Focus prompt prepended to every session.
.TP
.BR \-\-target\-repo " " \fIpath\fR
Workspace mode: add a target repo the agent has read/write access to in
addition to the control repo (the positional arg, which holds TASKS.md
and the slot lock). Repeat for multiple targets, or set
.BR TG_TARGET_REPOS
to a colon\-separated list. Slot 0 syncs and pushes each target on the
normal sync interval. Preserved across
.BR \-\-resume .
.TP
.BR \-\-from\-prompt " " \fItext\fR
Natural\-language config brief. Taskgrind asks the configured AI backend
to translate the text into KEY=VALUE config lines (hours, repo,
target_repos, model, backend, skill, focus, no_push) before launching.
Explicit CLI flags and
.BR TG_*
env vars always win; the translation fills only the slots the user did
not set. Same effect as setting
.BR TG_FROM_PROMPT .
Not compatible with
.BR \-\-resume .
.TP
.BR \-\-dry\-run
Print configuration and exit without running sessions.
.TP
.BR \-\-preflight
Run health checks and exit.
.TP
.BR \-\-resume
Resume an interrupted grind from the saved state in the target repo.
.TP
.BR \-\-no\-push
Commit locally only \(em never auto\-push to origin. Equivalent to setting
.BR TG_NO_PUSH=1 .
The agent prompt is rewritten to forbid
.BR "git push" ,
.BR "gh pr create" ,
and
.BR "gh pr merge" ,
and the final\-sync step logs
.BR "final_sync would_push commits=N head=<sha>"
instead of pushing. Operators review and push manually after the grind
exits. Preserved across
.BR \-\-resume .
.TP
.BR \-\-no\-pr\-fallback
Disable the auto\-PR fallback that triggers when
.B final_sync
push to the default branch is rejected by branch protection (GH006 /
required\-status\-check). Equivalent to setting
.BR TG_NO_PR_FALLBACK=1 .
With this flag, taskgrind classifies the failure as
.B push_protected_branch
but skips the PR\-creation step \(em commits stay on the local default branch
for manual handling. Without this flag (default), taskgrind pushes
the local commits to a unique
.B taskgrind\-ship\-<UTC>
branch and runs
.BR "gh pr create"
when
.B gh
is on
.BR PATH
and
.B TG_PUBLIC_WRITE_TOKEN
is set. Without the token, taskgrind writes a draft PR body to a temp file and
falls through to manual recovery.
.TP
.BR \-\-supervise " " \fIstatus-file\fR
Inspect another Taskgrind run's
.B TG_STATUS_FILE
JSON once. Healthy/progressing watched phases exit without invoking a
backend; failed or stale watched phases launch one bounded repair session in
the watched repo. The repair prompt includes the status path, watched log path,
stuck reason, normal completion protocol,
.B TG_NO_PUSH
semantics, and the public-write gate. This is the first supervisor/fixer slice;
continuous polling and richer repair heuristics are follow-up work.
.TP
.BR \-\-help ", " \-h
Show usage and environment variables.
.TP
.BR \-\-version ", " \-V
Print version (commit hash + date) and exit.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
TG_ is the canonical prefix. DVB_ is supported as a backward\-compatible alias.
.TP
.B TG_BACKEND
AI backend (default: devin).
.TP
.B TG_ROTATE_BACKENDS
Comma\-separated list overriding the auto\-detected backend rotation list.
By default, taskgrind enables rotation automatically when 2+ supported
backend binaries are installed. Set a single backend to disable cycling.
Same effect as
.BR \-\-rotate\-backends .
.TP
.B TG_MODEL
AI model (default: "gpt\-5\-5\-xhigh\-priority"; "gpt\-5.5" for codex).
.TP
.B TG_SKILL
Skill to run (default: next\-task).
.TP
.B TG_PROMPT
Extra focus prompt for every session.
.TP
.B TG_COOL
Seconds between sessions (default: 5).
.TP
.B TG_MAX_SESSION
Max seconds per session before timeout (default: 5400, was 3600 before
2026-04-29). The bump reflects bosun PR #1548 enforcing "code commits via
pipelines only" \(em sessions are now an orchestrator role (launch +
monitor + merge) and pipelines take 20\(en45 min each, so 90 min lets the
agent batch 2\(en3 pipeline cycles per session vs ~1 in the old direct-
edit model. When a session ships work but hits this timeout, taskgrind
logs a
.BR productive_timeout
marker and adds 1800 seconds (30 minutes) to the next session's budget, up to
a hard cap of 7200 seconds (2 hours). Operators who need a strict time budget
should plan around the 7200 s cap rather than the initial value.
.TP
.B TG_SWEEP_MAX
Max seconds for a backlog-discovery sweep session (default: 1800).
Independent of
.BR TG_MAX_SESSION
so the productive-timeout escalation cannot lengthen sweeps; a sweep that
needs more than 30 minutes should be split into smaller audit passes.
Each completed sweep emits
.BR "sweep_efficiency tasks=N elapsed=Ns tasks_per_min=N.NN"
so post-mortems can spot a degrading sweep without summing every
.BR sweep_done
line by hand.
.TP
.B TG_MIN_SESSION
Fast\-failure threshold in seconds (default: 30); shorter runs are treated as
startup or network failures rather than real work.
.TP
.B TG_MAX_FAST
Max consecutive fast failures before bail (default: 20); high enough to collect
diagnostics while bounding broken backend loops.
.TP
.B TG_MAX_ZERO_SHIP
Max consecutive zero\-ship sessions before bail (default: 6), aligned to the
5-session diminishing-returns window plus one confirmation trip.
.TP
.B TG_SELF_INVESTIGATE_ZERO_SHIP_STREAK
Consecutive zero\-ship sessions before stall-warning prompts, mid-run
self-investigation, and backend rotation (default: 3).
.TP
.B TG_BACKOFF_BASE
Base seconds for fast\-failure backoff (default: 15); slows crash loops after
diagnostics start.
.TP
.B TG_BACKOFF_MAX
Cap for fast\-failure backoff in seconds (default: 120); keeps recovery checks
at least every 2 minutes.
.TP
.B TG_NET_WAIT
Network polling interval in seconds (default: 30); responsive for Wi-Fi
recovery without log spam.
.TP
.B TG_NET_MAX_WAIT
Max time to wait for network recovery in seconds (default: 3600, 1h);
longer outages should be resumed explicitly after connectivity returns.
.TP
.B TG_NET_RETRIES
Network check retry attempts before declaring down (default: 3); filters
transient DNS/HTTP blips.
.TP
.B TG_NET_RETRY_DELAY
Seconds between network check retries (default: 2); keeps false-negative probes
under 10 seconds.
.TP
.B TG_NET_CHECK_URL
Override the fallback curl connectivity check URL when
.B network-watchdog
is unavailable (default: https://connectivitycheck.gstatic.com/generate_204).
.TP
.B TG_SYNC_INTERVAL
Git sync every N sessions (default: 5, 0=every); amortizes fetch/rebase
overhead while keeping long grinds fresh.
.TP
.B TG_EMPTY_QUEUE_WAIT
Seconds to wait after an empty sweep before exiting (default: 600); gives
external agents time to inject follow-up work.
.TP
.B TG_MAX_INSTANCES
Max concurrent taskgrind instances allowed per repo (default: 2); one sync owner
plus one conflict-avoiding worker.
.TP
.B TG_GIT_SYNC_TIMEOUT
Max seconds for between\-session git sync (default: 30); longer hangs need
operator recovery.
.TP
.B TG_LOG
Override log file path.
.TP
.B TG_STATUS_FILE
Write machine\-readable runtime status JSON to this path.
.TP
.B TG_NOTIFY
Desktop notification on completion (default: 1, 0 to disable).
.TP
.B TG_NO_PUSH
Set to 1 to commit locally only \(em
.B final_sync
logs
.BR "final_sync would_push commits=N head=<sha>"
instead of pushing, and the session prompt forbids
.BR "git push" ,
.BR "gh pr create" ,
and
.BR "gh pr merge"
(default: 0). Equivalent to passing
.BR \-\-no\-push ;
preserved across
.BR \-\-resume .
.TP
.B TG_NO_PR_FALLBACK
Set to 1 to disable the auto\-PR fallback that runs when
.B final_sync
push to the default branch is rejected by branch protection (GH006 /
.RB \(lq "protected branch hook declined" \(rq /
required\-status\-check). Default 0 (auto\-PR enabled when
.BR gh
is on
.BR PATH ,
.B TG_NO_PUSH
is not set, and
.B TG_PUBLIC_WRITE_TOKEN
is set): taskgrind pushes the local commits to a unique
.B taskgrind\-ship\-<UTC>
branch and runs
.BR "gh pr create" ,
logging
.BR "final_sync pr_created url=<url> commits=N branch=..." .
With
.BR TG_NO_PR_FALLBACK=1 ,
taskgrind logs
.BR "final_sync push_protected_branch_pr_fallback_disabled"
followed by
.BR "final_sync push_protected_branch_manual_recovery_needed"
and exits with the local commits intact for manual handling.
Equivalent to passing
.BR \-\-no\-pr\-fallback .
.TP
.B TG_PUBLIC_WRITE_TOKEN
Approval token that authorizes
.BR final_sync 's
auto\-PR creation. When set to any non\-empty string (e.g.
.BR "session\-2026\-05\-01" ),
taskgrind may push a feature branch and open a PR via
.B gh pr create
when the direct push is blocked by branch protection.
When unset (default), auto\-PR creation is blocked: taskgrind
writes the draft PR body to a temp file, prints
.BR "Approval needed \(em draft body at: <path>" ,
and falls through to
.BR "final_sync push_protected_branch_manual_recovery_needed" .
This prevents unapproved public writes from agent sessions \(em
TASKS.md task metadata (labels, tags, green\-list annotations) is
task context only and does NOT authorize any public write.
Set once per grind run to authorize the specific PR.
.TP
.B TG_TRUSTED_REPO
Set to 1 for personal/side\-project repos where the operator has
already granted blanket approval for feature\-branch
.B git push
and
.BR "gh pr create" .
The session prompt's
.B PUBLIC_WRITE_GATE
flips so the agent does not stop at the standard approval gate
for those two actions, letting it ship local commits via a PR
without a per\-session approval round\-trip.
Merging PRs (including
.BR "gh pr merge" ),
pushing directly to
.B main
/
.B master
or any protected branch, force\-pushing, bypassing pre\-push hooks
with \fB\-\-no\-verify\fR,
opening issues, posting to Slack/Jira/email, publishing packages,
and any cross\-repo or upstream public write are still gated.
TASKS.md task metadata (labels, tags, green\-list annotations) does
NOT extend the trusted\-repo grant to those gated actions.
Has no effect when
.BR TG_NO_PUSH=1 :
NO\-PUBLISH MODE wins so the agent is not told two opposite things
at once. Default 0.
.TP
.B TG_DEVIN_PATH
Override devin binary path (default: auto\-detect from PATH).
.TP
.B TG_TARGET_REPOS
Colon\-separated workspace target repo paths. Same effect as repeating
.BR \-\-target\-repo " " \fIpath\fR
on the command line. The control repo (positional arg) holds TASKS.md and
the slot lock; targets get
.B fetch
+
.B rebase
between sessions and a
.B push
from
.B final_sync
on slot 0. Preserved across
.BR \-\-resume .
.TP
.B TG_FROM_PROMPT
Natural\-language config brief that the configured AI backend translates
into KEY=VALUE config lines (hours, repo, target_repos, model, backend,
skill, focus, no_push) before launch. Same effect as
.BR \-\-from\-prompt " " \fItext\fR.
Explicit CLI flags and other
.B TG_*
env vars take precedence; the translation only fills slots the user did
not set. Not compatible with
.BR \-\-resume .
.TP
.B TG_SHUTDOWN_GRACE
Seconds to wait for current session on exit (default: 120).
.TP
.B TG_BOSUN_410_GRACE
Seconds to wait after a Bosun 410
.B EXIT_NOW
before SIGTERMing the active session (default: 30). Shorter than
.B TG_SHUTDOWN_GRACE
because Bosun has already disowned the session \(em the controller
just needs time for the backend to flush and commit. See TROUBLESHOOTING
for the
.B bosun_heartbeat_410
and
.B "graceful_shutdown trigger=bosun-410-exit-now"
log markers emitted on this path.
.TP
.B TG_SESSION_GRACE
Seconds to wait after session SIGINT before SIGTERM (default: 15).
.TP
.B TG_WATCHDOG_KILL_GRACE
Seconds to wait after session/sweep SIGTERM before the final SIGKILL
escalation (default: 5). The watchdog escalates
.BR SIGINT " \(-> "
.BR SIGTERM " \(-> "
.BR SIGKILL
so a wedged backend cannot run past the cap. See TROUBLESHOOTING for
the
.B sweep_watchdog escalation=SIGKILL
log marker emitted on the forced-kill path.
.TP
.B TG_STASH_WARN_THRESHOLD
Preflight warns when
.B "git stash list"
shows more than this many entries (default: 5). Helps catch repos
where prior crashed runs left WIP behind. The warning prints the
count, the oldest stash's timestamp, and a copy\-pasteable
.B "git stash list"
inspect command. Set to
.B 0
to disable. Warning only \(em never blocks launch.
.TP
.B TG_STALL_EXIT
When to auto-exit on the
.BR diminishing_returns
signal: one of
.BR never ,
.BR first ,
or
.BR second
(default:
.BR second ).
Taskgrind tracks shipped counts in a 5-session rolling window; once
session >= 5 and fewer than 2 tasks have shipped across the window,
taskgrind logs
.BR "diminishing_returns window=5 shipped=N consecutive=N"
and prints a low-throughput warning.
.BR second
(default) exits on the SECOND consecutive trip with
.BR "diminishing_returns_exit consecutive=2 reason=default-2x"
and sets the status phase to
.BR failed .
.BR first
exits on the FIRST trip with the historical
.BR early_exit_stall
marker.
.BR never
keeps the warning advisory; the grind keeps running regardless of how
many consecutive trips fire — useful for audit/discovery lanes where
low ship rates are expected.
.PP
.B "Deprecated stall-exit aliases."
The legacy
.BR TG_EARLY_EXIT_ON_STALL=1 ,
.BR TG_EXIT_ON_STALL=1 ,
and
.BR TG_NO_STALL_EXIT=1
vars still translate to
.BR TG_STALL_EXIT=first ,
.BR TG_STALL_EXIT=first ,
and
.BR TG_STALL_EXIT=never
respectively, but each emits a one-shot deprecation notice on stderr.
Setting both a
.BR never -mapping
and a
.BR first -mapping
legacy var at once is a hard error: prior versions silently let
.BR TG_NO_STALL_EXIT
win by precedence, which is now rejected with a startup message that
points operators at
.BR TG_STALL_EXIT
instead. Migrate to
.BR TG_STALL_EXIT
to silence the notice.
.SH BACKEND SETUP
Run
.B taskgrind \-\-preflight
after installing a backend. Preflight checks the backend binary, validates the
requested model before session 1, verifies that the selected backend can see
the requested skill, and reports the most actionable setup failure before a
long grind starts.
.PP
To run Claude Code as the primary lane, use the same preflight, env-default,
rotation, and resume shapes as the other supported backends:
.nf
taskgrind \-\-preflight \-\-backend claude\-code \-\-model claude\-sonnet\-4.6 ~/apps/myrepo
TG_BACKEND=claude\-code TG_MODEL=sonnet taskgrind ~/apps/myrepo 8
taskgrind \-\-rotate\-backends devin,claude\-code,codex ~/apps/myrepo 8
.fi
.TP
.B devin
Binary detection uses
.B devin
from
.BR PATH ,
or
.B TG_DEVIN_PATH
if set. Model validation runs
.B devin \-\-model <name> \-\-help
before launch. Common setup failures are
.B Backend binary not found (devin)
for a missing CLI or bad
.BR TG_DEVIN_PATH ,
and
.B Model rejected by devin before starting
for an unsupported model string. When the optional startup probe reports that
the backend is a stub or broken after
.BR \-\-version ,
reinstall or roll back the Devin CLI before retrying.
.TP
.B claude\-code
Binary detection uses
.B claude
from
.BR PATH .
Model validation runs
.B claude \-\-model <name> \-\-help
before launch. Common setup failures are
.B Backend binary not found (claude\-code)
when the Claude Code CLI is not installed or not on
.BR PATH ,
and
.B Model rejected by claude\-code before starting
when the selected Claude model is not available to that install or account.
Install or repair Claude Code with
.B npm install \-g @anthropic\-ai/claude\-code
and confirm
.B claude \-\-version
prints output. If preflight reports
.B Backend binary is not executable (claude\-code)
or the startup probe reports a silent stub after
.BR \-\-version ,
fix the
.B claude
binary on
.B PATH
before retrying.
.TP
.B codex
Binary detection uses
.B codex
from
.BR PATH .
Model validation runs
.B codex \-\-model <name> \-\-help
before launch. Common setup failures are
.B Backend binary not found (codex)
for a missing CLI and
.B Model rejected by codex before starting
for an unsupported OpenAI model name. If the selected model still looks like a
Claude model, taskgrind warns before launch and tells the operator to switch to
an OpenAI model such as
.B o3
or
.BR gpt\-5.5 .
.SH BOSUN PIPELINE CHECKS
For skills that require bosun pipelines (for example
.BR fleet\-grind ,
.BR full\-sweep ,
.BR bosun* ,
and
.BR pipeline-* ),
taskgrind captures a preflight completed/waiting-for-merge pipeline-count baseline from
.BR /api/v1/pipelines
and compares it to the cleanup count. The primary signal is
.B session-scoped:
when
.B BOSUN_GRIND_SESSION_ID
is set (after a successful
.BR "bosun grind register" ),
taskgrind queries
.BR /api/v1/pipelines?grindSessionId=<id>
so the delta only counts pipelines tagged with this Taskgrind grind session.
This keeps an unrelated fleet pipeline finishing during the run from masking a
session-local bypass. The fleet-wide count is still queried alongside and
written to the log as
.BR global_start ,
.BR global_end ,
and
.BR global_delta
for debugging only \(em it is never the pass condition.
.PP
The request sends
.BR "Authorization: Bearer <token>"
using
.B BOSUN_TOKEN
when set, otherwise the first line of
.BR ~/.orchestrator/auth-token .
If a session ships tasks but no new bosun pipelines complete for this grind
session, taskgrind logs
.BR "pipeline_verify ANOMALY"
and auto-files a TASKS.md investigation entry. If a new non-markdown commit
lacks Bosun pipeline attribution, taskgrind logs
.BR "pipeline_verify DIRECT_CODE_BYPASS"
and fails the run even when other pipelines completed concurrently.
.PP
For the same Bosun-dependent skills, taskgrind also manages the full
.B grind session
lifecycle: registration at preflight (via
.BR "bosun grind register" ),
periodic heartbeats every
.B TG_BOSUN_HEARTBEAT_INTERVAL
seconds (default 60) while the controller is running, and a
.B "bosun grind done"
call at exit with reason
.B completed
on a normal exit or
.B aborted
on a signal/error exit. Heartbeats keep Bosun's
.B lastHeartbeatAt
advancing so multi-minute child sessions don't get marked
.B disconnected
mid-grind. If the operator exported
.B BOSUN_GRIND_SESSION_ID
before launching taskgrind (caller-provided session), taskgrind heartbeats
that slot to keep it active but does
.B not
deregister it on exit \(em the caller owns the lifecycle. Heartbeat failures
are logged as
.B "bosun_heartbeat_failed"
warnings and do not crash the grind.
.PP
When the heartbeat returns HTTP 410 (Bosun has marked the session no longer
active/paused, e.g. after a status\-flip race) the CLI prints
.B EXIT_NOW
on stderr and exits 1. Taskgrind detects the marker, logs
.BR "bosun_heartbeat_410 action=exit_requested grace=Ns" ,
writes a sentinel file, and forwards
.B SIGTERM
to the controller. The
.B graceful_shutdown
trap then uses
.B TG_BOSUN_410_GRACE
(default 30 seconds) instead of
.B TG_SHUTDOWN_GRACE
as the time the active session has to commit and exit, marks
.B current_phase
as
.B bosun-410-exit-now ,
and writes
.B "terminal_reason=bosun-410-exit-now"
into both the
.B grind_done
log line and the status file. No new session is spawned after the 410 fires
because
.B graceful_shutdown
terminates the controller directly.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I TASKS.md
Task queue file in the target repo. Uses the tasks.md spec: checkbox tasks
under priority headings with required metadata such as
.B ID ,
.B Tags ,
.B Details ,
.B Files ,
and
.B Acceptance .
Use
.B Blocked by
only for real dependencies. Completed tasks are removed from the file instead
of being checked off.
.TP
.I .taskgrind\-prompt
Optional file in the target repo. Content is injected into every session prompt.
Re\-read before each session, so changes take effect live. Combine with \-\-prompt.
Files larger than 10KB are skipped.
Oversize prompt files emit a warning and do not affect the current or next
session prompt.
.TP
.I .taskgrind\-model
Optional file in the target repo. Content overrides the model for subsequent
sessions. Re\-read before each session. Overrides \-\-model and TG_MODEL when
present. Short aliases resolve the same way they do for \-\-model and TG_MODEL.
Delete the file to revert to the original startup model. Files larger than 1KB
are skipped.
Oversize model files emit a warning and leave the startup model in place.
.SS LIVE OVERRIDE FILES
Both repo-local override files are checked between sessions, not during an
active session. The current session keeps running with its original prompt and
model, and the next session picks up any file changes.
.PP
.B .taskgrind\-prompt
extends the startup \-\-prompt text for later sessions. Use it for temporary
focus shifts such as a flaky test, production issue, or audit note without
restarting the grind. Delete the file to stop injecting those extra
instructions.
If the file exceeds 10KB, taskgrind logs a warning and skips it.
.PP
.B .taskgrind\-model
overrides the startup model chosen by \-\-model or TG_MODEL for later sessions.
This lets operators start with a stronger model, then switch to a faster one as
the remaining work gets simpler. Delete the file to fall back to the startup
model. If the file exceeds 1KB, taskgrind logs a warning and skips it.
.SS PER-TASK RETRY CAP
Taskgrind tracks per-task attempt counts by
.B **ID**:
value from
.IR TASKS.md .
After every session, each task ID still present in the queue has its counter
incremented by one. When a task is removed from
.I TASKS.md
(the way shipping a task is recorded), its counter is cleared at the next
prune cycle.
.PP
Once a task crosses 3 attempts, taskgrind logs
.B task_skip_threshold ids=<id>
once and prepends
.RS
.nf
SKIP these stuck tasks (attempted 3+ times): <id>. Work on other tasks instead.
.fi
.RE
to every subsequent session prompt until the task ships or is removed. The
3-attempt threshold is a built-in constant today (not an environment
variable). If the skip list keeps firing on the same task, split it into
smaller IDs or mark it
.B **Blocked by**:
so the grind uses the
.B blocked_wait
path instead.
.PP
By default, taskgrind allows two concurrent grinds on the same repo. Set
.B TG_MAX_INSTANCES
above 2 to allow more. Each running grind claims the lowest free slot. Slot 0 owns the between\-session git sync;
higher slots skip that sync and receive conflict\-avoidance prompt guidance so multiple terminals do not run competing fetch/rebase loops in the same repo.
.PP
Example with three allowed slots:
.RS
.nf
TG_MAX_INSTANCES=3 taskgrind ~/apps/myrepo 8
TG_MAX_INSTANCES=3 taskgrind \-\-preflight ~/apps/myrepo
.fi
.RE
.PP
When those first two grinds are already running, the preflight header reports
\fBslots:    2/3 active\fR. Slot 0 is the only instance that performs the
between\-session fetch/rebase sync. Higher slots should prefer non\-overlapping
tasks such as audits, docs, or queue maintenance, and rebase immediately before
committing to absorb slot\-0 changes.
For a durable discovery lane, back the higher slot with a standardized
\fBstanding\-loop\fR task in
\fITASKS.md\fR instead of a sacrificial one-off audit item. The recommended
shape is a task such as \fBdiscovery\-standing\-loop\fR tagged with
\fBstanding\-loop, audit, queue\fR so the lane can keep replenishing normal
removable work while its own definition stays in the queue for the next pass.
Use
.B taskgrind \-\-preflight
to see how many slots are currently active before starting another grind.
.PP
Taskgrind exports \fBTG_INSTANCE_ID=\fR\fIslot\fR into every child process
(the AI backend, skills, hooks, wrapper scripts) so they can branch on the
running slot. The variable is \fBtaskgrind\-set, not user\-set\fR \(em
assigning it on the command line has no effect; taskgrind overwrites it
after the slot is claimed. Its value equals the lowest free slot the run
claimed (\fB0\fR, \fB1\fR, \fI...\fR); slot \fB0\fR owns the
between\-session git sync, slots \fB1\fR and above skip that sync and
prefer non\-overlapping work. Skills, hooks, and supervisor scripts can
read it to coordinate without re\-running
.BR \-\-preflight ;
for example, a discovery skill can gate extra
.BR "git pull \-\-rebase"
calls on
.BR "[ \\"${TG_INSTANCE_ID:-0}\\" \-ge 1 ]" .
The variable is intentionally absent from the
.B ENVIRONMENT
section and from
.BR "taskgrind \-\-help"
because it is not a knob \(em listing it there would imply users can set
it, which would race with the slot\-locking logic.
.TP
.I ${TMPDIR:\-/tmp}/taskgrind\-*.log
Session logs (one per grind invocation).
.TP
.I path set by TG_STATUS_FILE
Optional JSON status file updated atomically on startup, before and after each
session, during empty-queue waits and sweeps, around git sync decisions, during
network waits, and on final completion or failure.
.PP
Payload fields:
.RS
.TP
.B repo
Repo path being ground.
.TP
.B pid
Process ID of the current taskgrind run.
.TP
.B log_file
Primary log path for the current run. Supervisor mode includes this watched log
path in repair prompts when present.
.TP
.B slot
Claimed concurrency slot for this repo.
.TP
.B backend
Active backend such as devin, claude\-code, or codex.
.TP
.B skill
Skill prompt sent to each session.
.TP
.B model
Resolved model name currently in use.
.TP
.B session
Session counter for the current grind run.
.TP
.B remaining_minutes
Whole minutes remaining until the deadline, floored at 0.
.TP
.B current_phase
Lifecycle phase such as startup, preflight, running_session,
running_sweep, queue_refilled, session_complete, cooldown, git_sync,
git_sync_skipped, queue_empty_wait, queue_empty, blocked_wait,
all_tasks_blocked, waiting_for_network, network_restored,
deadline_expired, audit_focus_blocked, complete, or failed.
.TP
.B terminal_reason
Why a clean run stopped before
.B current_phase
rolled to
.BR complete ;
null during active work and normal success snapshots, or a stop reason such as
.BR queue_empty ,
.BR all_tasks_blocked ,
.BR deadline_expired ,
or
.BR audit_focus_blocked .
.TP
.B updated_at
Last write timestamp in the local %Y\-%m\-%dT%H:%M:%S%z format.
.TP
.B last_session.number
Most recently finished session number, or 0 before any session completes.
.TP
.B last_session.result
Exactly one of
.BR pending
(initial value before the first session completes, and re-set at the
start of every session),
.BR success
(most recent backend exit was 0),
.BR failure
(most recent backend exit was non-zero), or
.BR blocked
(audit-only focus refused because TASKS.md lacked a discovery-lane
standing-loop task).
.TP
.B last_session.exit_code
Backend exit code for the most recent session, or null before the first
completed session.
.TP
.B last_session.shipped
Tasks shipped by the most recent session.
.TP
.B last_session.duration_seconds
Runtime of the most recent session in seconds.
.TP
.B last_session.completed_at
Completion timestamp for the most recent session, or an empty string before any
session completes.
.RE
.PP
Lifecycle example:
.nf
{
  "repo": "/Users/alex/apps/myrepo",
  "pid": 48122,
  "log_file": "/tmp/taskgrind-myrepo.log",
  "slot": 0,
  "backend": "devin",
  "skill": "next-task",
  "model": "claude-opus-4-7-max",
  "session": 3,
  "remaining_minutes": 451,
  "current_phase": "running_session",
  "terminal_reason": null,
  "updated_at": "2026-04-11T18:33:44-0700",
  "last_session": {
    "number": 2,
    "result": "success",
    "exit_code": 0,
    "shipped": 1,
    "duration_seconds": 742,
    "completed_at": "2026-04-11T18:32:58-0700"
  }
}
.fi
.PP
The file starts at startup/preflight, moves through active phases such as
running_sweep or running_session, then transitions through queue_refilled,
session_complete, cooldown, git_sync, git_sync_skipped, queue_empty_wait,
queue_empty, blocked_wait, all_tasks_blocked, waiting_for_network,
network_restored, deadline_expired, or audit_focus_blocked as needed. A
successful shutdown writes one final complete state; if the clean stop came
from queue_empty, all_tasks_blocked, deadline_expired, or audit_focus_blocked,
that reason remains in
.B terminal_reason
for slower monitors. Startup or runtime errors finish as failed.
.PP
To run one Taskgrind as a one-shot fixer for another, point
.BR \-\-supervise
at the watched run's status file:
.PP
.nf
taskgrind \-\-supervise /tmp/taskgrind-status.json 1 ~/apps/myrepo
.fi
.PP
Supervisor mode writes
.BR supervisor_observation
for every inspection. Healthy/progressing phases do not launch a backend.
Failed or stale watched status logs
.BR supervisor_repair_start
and
.BR supervisor_repair_end
around a single repair session. Pass
.BR \-\-no\-push
or set
.BR TG_NO_PUSH=1
on the supervisor command when repair commits must stay local for review.
.PP
Supervisors should treat
.BR startup ,
.BR preflight ,
.BR running_session ,
.BR running_sweep ,
.BR queue_refilled ,
.BR session_complete ,
.BR cooldown ,
.BR git_sync ,
.BR git_sync_skipped ,
and
.BR network_restored
as healthy progress states.
.BR queue_empty_wait
and
.BR blocked_wait
mean the process is intentionally idle while it waits for queue changes.
.BR queue_empty ,
.BR all_tasks_blocked ,
.BR deadline_expired ,
and
.BR audit_focus_blocked
remain available in
.B terminal_reason
after the final
.B complete
snapshot so a poller can still tell why the grind stopped cleanly.
.BR waiting_for_network
means degraded-but-recoverable operation with the deadline held open.
Only
.BR complete
and
.BR failed
are terminal states for the current process.
.SH EXAMPLES
.nf
taskgrind                           # 10h grind, current dir
taskgrind ~/apps/myrepo 10         # 10h grind in specific repo
taskgrind \-\-model gpt\-5\-5\-xhigh\-priority 8
                                   # use specific model
taskgrind \-\-model "gpt\-5.5 XHigh thinking fast" 8
                                   # quote multi\-word model names
taskgrind \-\-model opus 8          # alias resolves to claude-opus-4-7-max
taskgrind \-\-skill pipeline\-ops ~/apps/bosun 10
                                   # custom installed skill
taskgrind \-\-backend claude\-code 8  # use Claude Code backend
TG_BACKEND=claude\-code TG_MODEL=sonnet taskgrind ~/apps/myrepo 8
                                   # reusable Claude Code defaults
taskgrind \-\-rotate\-backends devin,claude\-code,codex ~/apps/myrepo 8
                                   # override backend rotation
taskgrind \-\-prompt "focus on test coverage" 8
taskgrind \-\-dry\-run 8 ~/apps/myrepo
                                   # print config without running
taskgrind \-\-preflight ~/apps/myrepo
                                   # run health checks only
taskgrind \-\-resume ~/apps/myrepo
                                   # resume an interrupted grind
taskgrind \-\-resume \-\-backend claude\-code \-\-model sonnet ~/apps/myrepo
                                   # resume with saved Claude Code choices
taskgrind \-\-supervise /tmp/taskgrind-status.json 1 ~/apps/myrepo
                                   # inspect another run once and repair if stuck
taskgrind \-\-help / \-h            # show usage and environment variables
taskgrind \-\-version / \-V         # print version
TG_STATUS_FILE=/tmp/taskgrind-status.json taskgrind ~/apps/myrepo 8
                                   # write machine-readable status snapshots
TG_MODEL=sonnet taskgrind 8        # alias resolves to claude-sonnet-4.6
echo "claude\-sonnet\-4.6" > .taskgrind\-model  # switch model mid\-grind
.fi
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Normal completion (deadline reached or queue empty).
.TP
.B 1
Error (invalid args, missing binary, preflight failure).
.TP
.B 130
Interrupted by SIGINT (Ctrl\-C). Waits for running session, pushes commits.
.TP
.B 143
Terminated by SIGTERM. Waits for running session, pushes commits.
.SH RESUME
Use
.B taskgrind \-\-resume
in the same repo after an unexpected interruption such as a terminal crash or
machine reboot. The saved
.I .taskgrind\-state
file is a flat
.I key=value
snapshot that restores the original deadline, session counters, shipped-task
counters, backend, skill, model, and startup model. Start a fresh
.B taskgrind
run instead when you want a new deadline or different runtime settings. If the
saved deadline already expired, taskgrind rejects the stale state and tells you
to start a fresh grind. Resume also requires the original backend, model,
skill, and baseline prompt overrides to match; changing those inputs turns the
resume into a different grind and is rejected. See
.I docs/resume-state.md
for the current field contract and validation rules.
.PP
For example, a Claude Code grind that started with explicit backend/model
choices should be resumed with the same startup choices:
.nf
taskgrind \-\-resume \-\-backend claude\-code \-\-model sonnet ~/apps/myrepo
.fi
.SH TROUBLESHOOTING
When an unattended grind looks stuck, start with the JSON status file named by
.B TG_STATUS_FILE
if you enabled it, then confirm the same state in the taskgrind log.
.TP
.B Queue appears stuck
Inspect
.B current_phase
for
.BR queue_empty_wait ,
.BR blocked_wait ,
or
.BR running_sweep .
If the phase is one of the wait states, leave the process running and refill or
unblock
.I TASKS.md
instead of restarting immediately.
.TP
.B TASKS.md is not a regular file
If preflight reports that
.I TASKS.md
exists but is not a regular file, verify that you passed the real repo path.
On macOS case-insensitive filesystems, a sibling directory such as
.I tasks.md/
can satisfy the
.I TASKS.md
path lookup when you meant to point at a specific repo instead of a
parent-of-repos directory. Pass the concrete repo, use
.BR \-\-target\-repo
for workspace mode, or rerun with
.BR \-\-from\-prompt
if you do not remember the flags.
.TP
.B Slot contention
Run
.B taskgrind \-\-preflight ~/apps/myrepo
and inspect the
.B slots:
header plus the active owner list. Wait for a free slot or raise
.BR TG_MAX_INSTANCES .
Slot 0 remains the between-session sync owner; higher slots should stay on
docs, audits, status-file supervision, or other non-overlapping work.
.TP
.B Repeated zero-ship sessions
Check
.BR last_session.result ,
.BR last_session.shipped ,
and log markers such as
.BR productive_zero_ship
or
.BR shipped_inferred .
If the queue is changing under another worker, the session may still have
shipped useful work. Otherwise split or unblock the task before resuming.
.TP
.B Same task failing repeatedly
Look for
.B task_skip_threshold ids=<id>
in the log and a
.B SKIP these stuck tasks (attempted 3+ times)
line in the next session prompt. Taskgrind auto-skips tasks after 3
unproductive attempts; shipping or removing the task clears its counter. If a
task keeps hitting the cap, split it into smaller IDs or mark it
.B **Blocked by**:
so the grind waits in
.B blocked_wait
instead of chewing attempts.
.TP
.B Claude Code preflight/session startup failure
Run
.B taskgrind \-\-preflight \-\-backend claude\-code \-\-model claude\-sonnet\-4.6 ~/apps/myrepo
and inspect stderr plus the session log for
.BR "Backend binary not found (claude\-code)" ,
.BR "Backend binary is not executable (claude\-code)" ,
or
.BR "Model rejected by claude\-code before starting" .
Install or repair
.B @anthropic\-ai/claude\-code ,
confirm
.B claude \-\-version
prints output, choose a Claude model the account can use, and rerun the same
preflight before starting or resuming. If the failed run has an active
.I .taskgrind\-state ,
resume with the same saved backend/model/skill/prompt choices, for example
.BR "taskgrind \-\-resume \-\-backend claude\-code \-\-model sonnet ~/apps/myrepo" .
.TP
.B Network wait
Inspect
.BR current_phase=waiting_for_network
and the matching connectivity log lines. Let short outages recover normally; if
the outage exceeds
.BR TG_NET_MAX_WAIT ,
restore connectivity and rerun
.B taskgrind \-\-resume
to keep the original deadline.
.TP
.B Sweep ran past TG_SWEEP_MAX
Grep the log for
.BR "sweep_watchdog escalation=SIGKILL"
\(em the watchdog emits this marker only when a wedged backend ignored
both
.B SIGINT
and
.B SIGTERM
and had to be force\-killed. Absence of the line on a sweep that
exceeded its cap means the watchdog itself was disabled before the cap
fired (file a bug). The watchdog ignores spurious
.B TERM
and
.B INT
signals so an external
.B kill \-TERM
on the watchdog process cannot disarm it; the
.B sweep_watchdog escalation=SIGINT
and
.B sweep_watchdog escalation=SIGTERM
markers fire in order before
.B SIGKILL
to make the escalation auditable. See
.B TG_WATCHDOG_KILL_GRACE
to tune the
.B SIGTERM \(rA SIGKILL
window. The same escalation contract applies to per\-session and
supervisor\-repair watchdogs (markers
.B session_watchdog
and
.B supervisor_repair_watchdog ).
.TP
.B Bosun 410 EXIT_NOW aborted the grind early
Grep the log for
.B bosun_heartbeat_410
\(em this marker fires when Bosun's heartbeat endpoint returns HTTP 410
(session no longer active/paused). Taskgrind forwards
.B SIGTERM
to itself, shortens the shutdown grace to
.B TG_BOSUN_410_GRACE
seconds (default 30), and writes
.B "terminal_reason=bosun-410-exit-now"
on the
.B grind_done
line and in the status file. No new session is spawned after the 410.
Check Bosun's session-state history or
.B "bosun grind sessions"
to confirm the session was already marked terminal upstream. A 410 that
surprised the operator usually indicates a Bosun status\-flip race or an
external
.BR "bosun grind done"
call made while this grind was still running.
.TP
.B Resume rejected
Read the stderr reason, inspect
.I .taskgrind\-state ,
and compare it with
.I docs/resume-state.md .
Use the same repo, backend, model, skill, and baseline prompt inputs with the
active state file, or start fresh when the saved deadline has already expired.
.TP
.B Final push or sync failure
Read the last git lines in the log, inspect
.B git status --short
and
.B git log --oneline \-\-decorate \-5
in the repo, fix the push or rebase problem, then rerun
.B taskgrind \-\-resume
if the grind was interrupted mid-shutdown.
For non-fast-forward push rejections (the common case when a concurrent PR
squash-merged the same content under a different SHA),
.B final_sync
attempts an automatic
.B git pull --rebase --autostash
recovery and retries the push. The log shows
.B final_sync rebase_recovered
followed by
.B final_sync push_ok
when this succeeds. If the rebase encounters a real conflict it is aborted,
the working tree is left clean, and the existing
.B final_sync push_failed
path runs \[em] manual recovery is only required when the rebase itself fails.
.TP
.B Final push rejected by branch protection (GH006)
When the remote rejects the push because the default branch is protected
(GitHub Enterprise emits
.BR "GH006: Protected branch update failed" ,
required\-status\-check policies, etc.),
.B final_sync
classifies the failure as
.B push_protected_branch
and \(em when
.B gh
is on
.BR PATH ,
.B TG_NO_PUSH
is unset,
.B TG_NO_PR_FALLBACK
is unset, and
.B TG_PUBLIC_WRITE_TOKEN
is set \(em pushes the commits to a unique
.B taskgrind\-ship\-<UTC>
branch and opens a pull request via
.BR "gh pr create" ,
logging
.BR "final_sync pr_created url=<url> commits=N branch=..." .
The PR body includes a
.B "Why this is needed"
section and the canonical agent footer.
The PR is never auto\-merged \(em branch protection requires
human review or whatever the protection rule actually wants. When the
auto\-PR path is unavailable (no
.BR gh ,
.B TG_NO_PUSH=1 ,
.BR \-\-no\-pr\-fallback ,
.BR TG_NO_PR_FALLBACK=1 ,
or
.B TG_PUBLIC_WRITE_TOKEN
is not set) or fails, taskgrind logs
.B final_sync push_protected_branch_manual_recovery_needed
and exits with the local commits intact for manual handling.
When blocked by the missing token, taskgrind additionally writes the
draft PR body to a temp file and prints
.BR "Approval needed \(em draft body at: <path>" .
.SH DEVELOPMENT
For repo maintenance, the standard local workflow is:
.RS
.TP
.B make lint
Run shellcheck across the shipped scripts.
.TP
.B make test
Run the bats suite with caching enabled, using the repo's default parallelism.
.TP
.B make test-force
Re-run the selected bats suite from scratch without using the cached result.
.TP
.B "make test TESTS=tests/bash\-compat.bats"
Re-run one bats file with its own cache key for tight local loops.
.TP
.B "make test TEST_JOBS=2"
Reproduce the default GitHub Actions parallelism when diagnosing bats scheduling issues.
.TP
.B make audit
Run the offline repo-audit loop: scan for TODO/FIXME markers, run shellcheck,
with the core docs and repo-local audit skills included in that scan, and print
the core docs review queue including
.I README.md ,
.I CONTRIBUTING.md ,
.I SECURITY.md ,
.I AGENTS.md ,
.I Agentfile.yaml ,
.I docs/architecture.md ,
.I docs/resume-state.md ,
.I docs/user-stories.md ,
.I man/taskgrind.1 ,
.I .devin/skills/standing-audit-gap-loop/SKILL.md ,
and
.I .devin/skills/grind-log-analyze/SKILL.md .
.TP
.B make check
Run lint plus the cached test flow before committing.
.RE
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR devin (1),
.BR bats (1),
.BR shellcheck (1)
.SH AUTHORS
Created by Fyodor Ivanishchev. Extracted from dotfiles where it lived as dvb\-grind.
